# RFC 4253 - SSH传输层协议

The Secure Shell (SSH) Transport Layer Protocol

Table of Contents
====

<!-- TOC -->

- [RFC 4253 - SSH传输层协议](#rfc-4253---ssh传输层协议)
        - [介绍](#介绍)
        - [本文档中使用的约定](#本文档中使用的约定)
        - [连接设置](#连接设置)
            - [通过 TCP/IP 使用](#通过-tcpip-使用)
            - [协议版本交换](#协议版本交换)
        - [与旧版本的兼容性](#与旧-ssh-版本的兼容性)
            - [旧客户端，新服务器](#旧客户端新服务器)
            - [新客户端，旧服务器](#新客户端旧服务器)
            - [数据包大小和开销](#数据包大小和开销)
        - [二进制包协议](#二进制包协议)
            - [最大数据包长度](#最大数据包长度)
            - [压缩](#压缩)
            - [加密](#加密)
            - [据的完整性](#据的完整性)
            - [密钥交换方法](#密钥交换方法)
            - [公钥算法](#公钥算法)
        - [密钥交换](#密钥交换)
            - [算法协商](#算法协商)
            - [密钥交换的输出](#密钥交换的输出)
            - [使用秘钥](#使用秘钥)
        - [Diffie-Hellman 密钥交换](#diffie-hellman-密钥交换)
            - [diffie-hellman-group1-sha1](#diffie-hellman-group1-sha1)
            - [diffie-hellman-group14-sha1](#diffie-hellman-group14-sha1)
        - [密钥交换](#密钥交换-1)
        - [服务请求](#服务请求)
        - [附加信息](#附加信息)
            - [断开消息](#断开消息)
            - [忽略数据消息](#忽略数据消息)
            - [调试信息](#调试信息)
            - [保留消息](#保留消息)
        - [消息号汇总](#消息号汇总)
            - [IANA 考虑事项](#iana-考虑事项)
            - [安全注意事项](#安全注意事项)
        - [参考资料](#参考资料)
            - [规范性参考文献](#规范性参考文献)
            - [参考性文献](#参考性文献)

<!-- /TOC -->

### 介绍

SSH 传输层是一种安全的底层(low level)传输协议。
它提供强大的加密(encryption)、加密主机身份验证(cryptographic host authentication)和完整性保护(integrity protection)功能。 
此协议层的身份验证是基于主机的； 此协议不执行用户身份验证。 
可以在此协议之上设计用于用户身份验证的高级别的协议。 

该协议被设计为简单灵活，以允许参数协商(parameter negotiation)，并最大限度地减少往返(round-trips)次数。 
密钥交换方法、公钥算法、对称加密算法、消息认证算法、哈希算法都是能够协商的。 
预计在大多数环境中，完整密钥交换、服务器身份验证、服务请求和服务请求的接受通知只需要 2 次往返。最坏的情况是 3 次往返。

SSH 传输层协议可以基于 TCP 或 UDP 来实现

> [Mosh](https://mosh.org/) 是一款基于 UDP 的的 shell。


当通过 TCP/IP 使用时，服务器通常侦听端口 22 上的连接。此端口号已在 IANA 注册，并已正式分配给 SSH。

SSH 适用于任何 8 位干净(8-bit clean)、二进制透明的传输。
底层传输(underlying transport)应该防止传输错误，因为这些错误会导致 SSH 连接终止。 
由客户端发起连接。



#### 协议版本交换

建立连接(TCP三次握手)后，双方必须发送一个标识(identification)字符串。
该标识字符串格式如下:

```bash
SSH-protoversion-softwareversion [SP comments] CR LF

# 由于本文中定义的协议是 2.0 版，所以 "protoversion"必须是"2.0"
# SP 是空格
# CR: Carriage Return, 回车
# LF: Line Feed, 换行
# comments: 注释是可选的, 如果有前面必须有空格(SP)
``` 

其中不能有空字符('\0')；
包含回车和换行,标识字符串最长为 255 个字节。
   
如果希望与旧版的协议保持兼容性，可能希望在不期望出现回车字符的情况下处理标识字符串.

回车符和换行符之前的识别字符串部分用于 Diffie-Hellman 密钥交换
服务器可以在发送版本字符串之前发送其他行数据。每行应该以回车和换行结束。
此类行不得以“SSH-”开头，且应以 ISO-10646 UTF-8 编码（未指定语言）。
客户端必须能够处理这样的行。这些行可能会被默默忽略，或者可能会显示给客户端用户。
如果显示它们，则应使用控制字符过滤，如 SSH-ARCH 中所述。
此功能的主要用途是允许 TCP wrapper 在断开连接之前显示错误消息。
'protoversion' 和 'softwareversion' 字符串都必须由可打印的 US-ASCII 字符组成，空白字符和减号 (-) 除外。
'softwareversion' 字符串主要用于触发兼容性扩展并指示实现的功能。
'comments' 字符串应该包含可能对解决用户问题有用的附加信息。
因此，有效标识字符串的示例是 `SSH-2.0-billsSSH_3.6.3q3<CR><LF>`
该标识字符串不包含可选的“comments”字符串，因此在“softwareversion”字符串之后立即由 CR 和 LF 终止。
发送此标识符后将立即开始密钥交换。

标识字符串后面的所有数据包都应使用第 6 节中描述的二进制数据包协议。


### 与旧 SSH 版本的兼容性

As stated earlier, the 'protoversion' specified for this protocol is "2.0". 
Earlier versions of this protocol have not been formally documented, but it is widely known that they use 'protoversion' of "1.x" (e.g., "1.5" or "1.3").  
At the time of this writing, many implementations of SSH are utilizing protocol version 2.0, but it is known that there are still devices using the previous versions.
During the transition period, it is important to be able to work in a way that is compatible with the installed SSH clients and servers that use the older version of the protocol.  
Information in this section is only relevant for implementations supporting compatibility with SSH versions 1.x.  
For those interested, the only known documentation of the 1.x protocol is contained in README files that are shipped along with the source code [ssh-1.2.30](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-ssh-1.2.30).

#### 旧客户端，新服务器

Server implementations MAY support a configurable compatibility flag that enables compatibility with old versions.  
When this flag is on, the server SHOULD identify its 'protoversion' as "1.99". 
Clients using protocol 2.0 MUST be able to identify this as identical to "2.0".  
In this mode, the server SHOULD NOT send the Carriage Return character (ASCII 13) after the identification string.
In the compatibility mode, the server SHOULD NOT send any further data after sending its identification string until it has received an identification string from the client.  
The server can then determine whether the client is using an old protocol, and can revert to the old protocol if required.
In the compatibility mode, the server MUST NOT send additional data before the identification string.
When compatibility with old clients is not needed, the server MAY send its initial key exchange data immediately after the identification string.

#### 新客户端，旧服务器

Since the new client MAY immediately send additional data after its identification string (before receiving the server's identification string), 
the old protocol may already be corrupt when the client learns that the server is old.  
When this happens, the client SHOULD close the connection to the server, and reconnect using the old protocol.

#### 数据包大小和开销

Some readers will worry about the increase in packet size due to new headers, padding, and the Message Authentication Code (MAC).  
The minimum packet size is in the order of 28 bytes (depending on negotiated algorithms).  
The increase is negligible for large packets, but very significant for one-byte packets (telnet-type sessions).  
There are, however, several factors that make this a non-issue in almost all cases:
   o  The minimum size of a TCP/IP header is 32 bytes.  Thus, the
      increase is actually from 33 to 51 bytes (roughly).
   o  The minimum size of the data field of an Ethernet packet is 46
      bytes [RFC0894](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc0894).  Thus, the increase is no more than 5 bytes.
      When Ethernet headers are considered, the increase is less than 10 percent.
   o  The total fraction of telnet-type data in the Internet is negligible, even with increased packet sizes.
   The only environment where the packet size increase is likely to have
   a significant effect is PPP [RFC1661](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1661) over slow modem lines (PPP compresses the TCP/IP headers, emphasizing the increase in packet
   size).  
However, with modern modems, the time needed to transfer is in the order of 2 milliseconds, which is a lot faster than people can type.
There are also issues related to the maximum packet size.  
To minimize delays in screen updates, one does not want excessively large packets for interactive sessions.  
The maximum packet size is negotiated separately for each channel.

### 二进制包协议

Each packet is in the following format:

```c
uint32    packet_length;
byte      padding_length;
byte[n1]  payload; // n1 = packet_length - padding_length - 1
byte[n2]  random padding; // n2 = padding_length
byte[m]   mac; // (Message Authentication Code - MAC); m = mac_length
```

packet_length
         The length of the packet in bytes, not including 'mac' or the 'packet_length' field itself.

padding_length
         Length of 'random padding' (bytes).

payload
         The useful contents of the packet.  If compression has been negotiated, this field is compressed.  Initially, compression MUST be "none".

random padding
         Arbitrary-length padding, such that the total length of (packet_length || padding_length || payload || random padding) is a multiple of the cipher block size or 8, whichever is larger.  There MUST be at least four bytes of padding.  
         The padding SHOULD consist of random bytes. 
         The maximum amount of padding is 255 bytes.

mac
         Message Authentication Code.  If message authentication has been negotiated, this field contains the MAC bytes.  
         Initially, the MAC algorithm MUST be "none".

Note that the length of the concatenation of 'packet_length', 'padding_length', 'payload', and 'random padding' MUST be a multiple of the cipher block size or 8, whichever is larger.  
This constraint MUST be enforced, even when using stream ciphers.  Note that the 'packet_length' field is also encrypted, and processing it requires special care when sending or receiving packets.  
Also note that the insertion of variable amounts of 'random padding' may help thwart traffic analysis.
The minimum size of a packet is 16 (or the cipher block size, whichever is larger) bytes (plus 'mac').  Implementations SHOULD decrypt the length after receiving the first 8 (or cipher block size, whichever is larger) bytes of a packet.

#### 最大数据包长度

All implementations MUST be able to process packets with an
   uncompressed payload length of 32768 bytes or less and a total packet
   size of 35000 bytes or less (including 'packet_length', 'padding_length', 'payload', 'random padding', and 'mac').  
   
The maximum of 35000 bytes is an arbitrarily chosen value that is larger than the uncompressed length noted above.  
Implementations SHOULD support longer packets, where they might be needed.  
For example, if an implementation wants to send a very large number of certificates,
the larger packets MAY be sent if the identification string indicates that the other party is able to process them.  
However, implementations SHOULD check that the packet length is reasonable in order for the implementation to avoid denial of service and/or buffer overflow attacks.

#### 压缩

If compression has been negotiated, the 'payload' field (and only it) will be compressed using the negotiated algorithm.
The 'packet_length' field and 'mac' will be computed from the compressed payload.  
Encryption will be done after compression.

Compression MAY be stateful, depending on the method.
Compression MUST be independent for each direction, and implementations MUST allow independent choosing of the algorithm for each direction.  
In practice however, it is RECOMMENDED that the compression method be the same in both directions.
 The following compression methods are currently defined:
      none     REQUIRED        no compression
      zlib     OPTIONAL        ZLIB (LZ77) compression

The "zlib" compression is described in [RFC1950](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1950) and in [RFC1951](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1951).

The compression context is initialized after each key exchange, and is passed from one packet to the next, 
with only a partial flush being performed at the end of each packet.  
A partial flush means that the current compressed block is ended and all data will be output.  
If the current block is not a stored block, one or more empty blocks are added after the current block to ensure that there are at least 8 bits, 
counting from the start of the end-of-block code of the current block to the end of the packet payload.
Additional methods may be defined as specified in [SSH-ARCH](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-ARCH ) and [SSH-NUMBERS](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-NUMBERS).

#### 加密

An encryption algorithm and a key will be negotiated during the key exchange.
When encryption is in effect, the packet length, padding length, payload, and padding fields of each packet MUST be encrypted with the given algorithm.
The encrypted data in all packets sent in one direction SHOULD be considered a single data stream.  
For example, initialization vectors SHOULD be passed from the end of one packet to the beginning of the next packet.  
All ciphers SHOULD use keys with an effective key length of 128 bits or more.
The ciphers in each direction MUST run independently of each other.
Implementations MUST allow the algorithm for each direction to be independently selected, 
if multiple algorithms are allowed by local policy.
In practice however, it is RECOMMENDED that the same algorithm be used in both directions.

The following ciphers are currently defined:
      3des-cbc         REQUIRED          three-key 3DES in CBC mode
      blowfish-cbc     OPTIONAL          Blowfish in CBC mode
      twofish256-cbc   OPTIONAL          Twofish in CBC mode,
                                         with a 256-bit key
      twofish-cbc      OPTIONAL          alias for "twofish256-cbc"
                                         (this is being retained
                                         for historical reasons)
      twofish192-cbc   OPTIONAL          Twofish with a 192-bit key
      twofish128-cbc   OPTIONAL          Twofish with a 128-bit key
      aes256-cbc       OPTIONAL          AES in CBC mode,
                                         with a 256-bit key
      aes192-cbc       OPTIONAL          AES with a 192-bit key
      aes128-cbc       RECOMMENDED       AES with a 128-bit key
      serpent256-cbc   OPTIONAL          Serpent in CBC mode, with
                                         a 256-bit key
      serpent192-cbc   OPTIONAL          Serpent with a 192-bit key
      serpent128-cbc   OPTIONAL          Serpent with a 128-bit key
      arcfour          OPTIONAL          the ARCFOUR stream cipher
                                         with a 128-bit key
      idea-cbc         OPTIONAL          IDEA in CBC mode
      cast128-cbc      OPTIONAL          CAST-128 in CBC mode
      none             OPTIONAL          no encryption; NOT RECOMMENDED

The "3des-cbc" cipher is three-key triple-DES (encrypt-decrypt-encrypt), where the first 8 bytes of the key are used for the first encryption,
the next 8 bytes for the decryption, and the following 8 bytes for the final encryption.  
This requires 24 bytes of key data (of which 168 bits are actually used). 
To implement CBC mode, outer chaining MUST be used (i.e., there is only one initialization vector).  
This is a block cipher with 8-byte blocks. 
This algorithm is defined in [FIPS-46-3](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-FIPS-46-3).
Note that since this algorithm only has an effective key length of 112 bits ([SCHNEIER](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SCHNEIER), 
it does not meet the specifications that SSH encryption algorithms should use keys of 128 bits or more.
However, this algorithm is still REQUIRED for historical reasons; 
essentially, all known implementations at the time of this writing support this algorithm, 
and it is commonly used because it is the fundamental interoperable algorithm.  
At some future time, it is expected that another algorithm, 
one with better strength, will become so prevalent and ubiquitous that the use of "3des-cbc" will be deprecated by another STANDARDS ACTION.

The "blowfish-cbc" cipher is Blowfish in CBC mode, with 128-bit keys [SCHNEIER](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SCHNEIER).
This is a block cipher with 8-byte blocks.

The "twofish-cbc" or "twofish256-cbc" cipher is Twofish in CBC mode, with 256-bit keys as described [TWOFISH](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-TWOFISH).
This is a block cipher with 16-byte blocks.

The "twofish192-cbc" cipher is the same as above, but with a 192-bit key.

The "twofish128-cbc" cipher is the same as above, but with a 128-bit key.

The "aes256-cbc" cipher is AES (Advanced Encryption Standard) [FIPS-197](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-FIPS-197), in CBC mode.  
This version uses a 256-bit key.

The "aes192-cbc" cipher is the same as above, but with a 192-bit key.

The "aes128-cbc" cipher is the same as above, but with a 128-bit key.

The "serpent256-cbc" cipher in CBC mode, with a 256-bit key as described in the Serpent AES submission.

The "serpent192-cbc" cipher is the same as above, but with a 192-bit key.
The "serpent128-cbc" cipher is the same as above, but with a 128-bit key.

The "arcfour" cipher is the Arcfour stream cipher with 128-bit keys.
The Arcfour cipher is believed to be compatible with the RC4 cipher [SCHNEIER](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SCHNEIER).  
Arcfour (and RC4) has problems with weak keys, and should be used with caution.

The "idea-cbc" cipher is the IDEA cipher in CBC mode [SCHNEIER](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SCHNEIER).

The "cast128-cbc" cipher is the CAST-128 cipher in CBC mode with a 128-bit key [[RFC2144](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2144).

The "none" algorithm specifies that no encryption is to be done.

Note that this method provides no confidentiality protection, and it is NOT RECOMMENDED.  
Some functionality (e.g., password authentication) may be disabled for security reasons if this cipher is chosen.

Additional methods may be defined as specified in [SSH-ARCH](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-ARCH ) and in [SSH-NUMBERS](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-NUMBERS).

#### 据的完整性

Data integrity is protected by including with each packet a MAC that is computed from a shared secret, packet sequence number, and the contents of the packet.
The message authentication algorithm and key are negotiated during key exchange.  

Initially, no MAC will be in effect, and its length MUST be zero.  
After key exchange, the 'mac' for the selected MAC algorithm will be computed before encryption from the concatenation of packet data:

```c
mac = MAC(key, sequence_number || unencrypted_packet)
```

 where unencrypted_packet is the entire packet without 'mac' (the length fields, 'payload' and 'random padding'), 
and sequence_numberis an implicit packet sequence number represented as uint32.  
The sequence_number is initialized to zero for the first packet, and is incremented after every packet (regardless of whether encryption or MAC is in use).  
It is never reset, even if keys/algorithms are renegotiated later.  
It wraps around to zero after every 2^32 packets.  
The packet sequence_number itself is not included in the packet sent over the wire.

The MAC algorithms for each direction MUST run independently, 
and implementations MUST allow choosing the algorithm independently for both directions.  

In practice however, it is RECOMMENDED that the same algorithm be used in both directions.
The value of 'mac' resulting from the MAC algorithm MUST be transmitted without encryption as the last part of the packet.  
The number of 'mac' bytes depends on the algorithm chosen.
The following MAC algorithms are currently defined:
      hmac-sha1    REQUIRED        HMAC-SHA1 (digest length = key length = 20)
      hmac-sha1-96 RECOMMENDED     first 96 bits of HMAC-SHA1 (digest length = 12, key length = 20)
      hmac-md5     OPTIONAL        HMAC-MD5 (digest length = key length = 16)
      hmac-md5-96  OPTIONAL        first 96 bits of HMAC-MD5 (digest length = 12, key length = 16)
      none         OPTIONAL        no MAC; NOT RECOMMENDED

The "hmac-*" algorithms are described in [RFC2104](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2104).
The "*-n" MACs use only the first n bits of the resulting value.

SHA-1 is described in [FIPS-180-2](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-FIPS-180-2) and MD5 is described in [RFC1321](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1321).
Additional methods may be defined, as specified in [SSH-ARCH](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-ARCH) and in [SSH-NUMBERS](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-NUMBERS).

#### 密钥交换方法

The key exchange method specifies how one-time session keys are generated for encryption and for authentication, 
and how the server authentication is done.
Two REQUIRED key exchange methods have been defined:
      diffie-hellman-group1-sha1  REQUIRED
      diffie-hellman-group14-sha1 REQUIRED

These methods are described in Section 8.
Additional methods may be defined as specified in [SSH-NUMBERS](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-NUMBERS).
The name "diffie-hellman-group1-sha1" is used for a key exchange method using an Oakley group, 
as defined in [RFC2409](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2409).  
SSH maintains its own group identifier space that is logically distinct from Oakley [RFC2412](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2412) and IKE; 
however, for one additional group, the Working Group adopted the number assigned by [RFC3526](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3526 ), 
using diffie- hellman-group14-sha1 for the name of the second defined group.
Implementations should treat these names as opaque identifiers and should not assume any relationship between the groups used by SSH and the groups defined for IKE.

#### 公钥算法

This protocol has been designed to operate with almost any public key format, encoding, and algorithm (signature and/or encryption).
There are several aspects that define a public key type:
   o  Key format: how is the key encoded and how are certificates represented.  
      The key blobs in this protocol MAY contain certificates in addition to keys.
   o  Signature and/or encryption algorithms.  Some key types may not support both signing and encryption.  
      Key usage may also be restricted by policy statements (e.g., in certificates).  
      In this case, different key types SHOULD be defined for the different policy alternatives.
   o  Encoding of signatures and/or encrypted data.  
      This includes but is not limited to padding, byte order, and data formats.

   The following public key and/or certificate formats are currently
   defined:
   ssh-dss           REQUIRED     sign   Raw DSS Key
   ssh-rsa           RECOMMENDED  sign   Raw RSA Key
   pgp-sign-rsa      OPTIONAL     sign   OpenPGP certificates (RSA key)
   pgp-sign-dss      OPTIONAL     sign   OpenPGP certificates (DSS key)

Additional key types may be defined, as specified in [SSH-ARCH](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-ARCH)  and in [SSH-NUMBERS](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-NUMBERS).
The key type MUST always be explicitly known (from algorithm negotiation or some other source).
It is not normally included in the key blob.
Certificates and public keys are encoded as follows:

```c
string    certificate or public key format identifier
byte[n]   key/certificate data
```

The certificate part may be a zero length string, but a public key is required.  
This is the public key that will be used for authentication.  
The certificate sequence contained in the certificate blob can be used to provide authorization.
Public key/certificate formats that do not explicitly specify a signature format identifier MUST use the public key/certificate format identifier as the signature identifier.
Signatures are encoded as follows:

```c
string    signature format identifier (as specified by the public key/certificate format)
byte[n]   signature blob in format specific encoding.
```
The "ssh-dss" key format has the following specific encoding:
      string    "ssh-dss"
      mpint     p
      mpint     q
      mpint     g
      mpint     y
Here, the 'p', 'q', 'g', and 'y' parameters form the signature key blob.

Signing and verifying using this key format is done according to the Digital Signature Standard [FIPS-186-2](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-FIPS-186-2) using the SHA-1 hash [FIPS-180-2](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-FIPS-180-2).
The resulting signature is encoded as follows:

```c
string    "ssh-dss"
string    dss_signature_blob
```

The value for 'dss_signature_blob' is encoded as a string containing r, followed by s (which are 160-bit integers, without lengths or padding, unsigned, and in network byte order).

The "ssh-rsa" key format has the following specific encoding:
```c
      string    "ssh-rsa"
      mpint     e
      mpint     n
```

Here the 'e' and 'n' parameters form the signature key blob.
Signing and verifying using this key format is performed according to the RSASSA-PKCS1-v1_5 scheme in [RFC3447](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3447) using the SHA-1 hash.
The resulting signature is encoded as follows:

```c
      string    "ssh-rsa"
      string    rsa_signature_blob
```

The value for 'rsa_signature_blob' is encoded as a string containing s (which is an integer, without lengths or padding, unsigned, and in network byte order).

The "pgp-sign-rsa" method indicates the certificates, the public key,
and the signature are in OpenPGP compatible binary format [RFC2440](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2440).
This method indicates that the key is an RSA-key.

The "pgp-sign-dss" is as above, but indicates that the key is a DSS-key.

### 密钥交换

Key exchange (kex) begins by each side sending name-lists of supported algorithms.
Each side has a preferred algorithm in each category, 
and it is assumed that most implementations, 
at any given time, will use the same preferred algorithm.
Each side MAY guess which algorithm the other side is using, 
and MAY send an initial key exchange packet according to the algorithm, 
if appropriate for the preferred method.

The guess is considered wrong if:
   o  the kex algorithm and/or the host key algorithm is guessed wrong (server and client have different preferred algorithm), 
       or
   o  if any of the other algorithms cannot be agreed upon (the procedure is defined below in Section 7.1.

Otherwise, the guess is considered to be right, 
and the optimistically sent packet MUST be handled as the first key exchange packet.
However, if the guess was wrong, and a packet was optimistically sent by one or both parties, 
such packets MUST be ignored (even if the error in the guess would not affect the contents of the initial packet(s)), 
and the appropriate side MUST send the correct initial packet.

A key exchange method uses explicit server authentication if the key exchange messages include a signature or other proof of the server's authenticity.  
A key exchange method uses implicit server authentication if, in order to prove its authenticity, 
the server also has to prove that it knows the shared secret, K, by sending a message and a corresponding MAC that the client can verify.

The key exchange method defined by this document uses explicit server authentication.  
However, key exchange methods with implicit server authentication MAY be used with this protocol.  

After a key exchange with implicit server authentication, 
the client MUST wait for a response to its service request message before sending any further data.

#### 算法协商

Key exchange begins by each side sending the following packet:

      byte         SSH_MSG_KEXINIT
      byte[16]     cookie (random bytes)
      name-list    kex_algorithms
      name-list    server_host_key_algorithms
      name-list    encryption_algorithms_client_to_server
      name-list    encryption_algorithms_server_to_client
      name-list    mac_algorithms_client_to_server
      name-list    mac_algorithms_server_to_client
      name-list    compression_algorithms_client_to_server
      name-list    compression_algorithms_server_to_client
      name-list    languages_client_to_server
      name-list    languages_server_to_client
      boolean      first_kex_packet_follows
      uint32       0 (reserved for future extension)

Each of the algorithm name-lists MUST be a comma-separated list of
   algorithm names (see Algorithm Naming in [[SSH-ARCH](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-ARCH ""The Secure Shell (SSH) Protocol Architecture"")] and additional
   information in [[SSH-NUMBERS](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-NUMBERS).

Each supported (allowed) algorithm MUST be listed in order of preference, from most to least.
The first algorithm in each name-list MUST be the preferred (guessed) algorithm.  
Each name-list MUST contain at least one algorithm name.
      cookie
         The 'cookie' MUST be a random value generated by the sender.
         Its purpose is to make it impossible for either side to fully
         determine the keys and the session identifier.
      kex_algorithms
         Key exchange algorithms were defined above.  The first
         algorithm MUST be the preferred (and guessed) algorithm.  If
         both sides make the same guess, that algorithm MUST be used.
         Otherwise, the following algorithm MUST be used to choose a key
         exchange method: Iterate over client's kex algorithms, one at a
         time.  Choose the first algorithm that satisfies the following
         conditions:
         +  the server also supports the algorithm,
         +  if the algorithm requires an encryption-capable host key,
            there is an encryption-capable algorithm on the server's
            server_host_key_algorithms that is also supported by the
            client, and
         +  if the algorithm requires a signature-capable host key,
            there is a signature-capable algorithm on the server's
            server_host_key_algorithms that is also supported by the
            client.
      If no algorithm satisfying all these conditions can be found, the
      connection fails, and both sides MUST disconnect.
      server_host_key_algorithms
         A name-list of the algorithms supported for the server host
         key.  The server lists the algorithms for which it has host
         keys; the client lists the algorithms that it is willing to
         accept.  There MAY be multiple host keys for a host, possibly
         with different algorithms.
         Some host keys may not support both signatures and encryption
         (this can be determined from the algorithm), and thus not all
         host keys are valid for all key exchange methods.
         Algorithm selection depends on whether the chosen key exchange
         algorithm requires a signature or an encryption-capable host
         key.  It MUST be possible to determine this from the public key
         algorithm name.  The first algorithm on the client's name-list
         that satisfies the requirements and is also supported by the
         server MUST be chosen.  If there is no such algorithm, both
         sides MUST disconnect.
      encryption_algorithms
         A name-list of acceptable symmetric encryption algorithms (also
         known as ciphers) in order of preference.  The chosen
         encryption algorithm to each direction MUST be the first
         algorithm on the client's name-list that is also on the
         server's name-list.  If there is no such algorithm, both sides
         MUST disconnect.
         Note that "none" must be explicitly listed if it is to be
         acceptable.  The defined algorithm names are listed in [Section](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#section-6.3)
         [6.3](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#section-6.3).
      mac_algorithms
         A name-list of acceptable MAC algorithms in order of
         preference.  The chosen MAC algorithm MUST be the first
         algorithm on the client's name-list that is also on the
         server's name-list.  If there is no such algorithm, both sides
         MUST disconnect.
         Note that "none" must be explicitly listed if it is to be
         acceptable.  The MAC algorithm names are listed in [Section 6.4](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#section-6.4).

      compression_algorithms
         A name-list of acceptable compression algorithms in order of
         preference.  The chosen compression algorithm MUST be the first
         algorithm on the client's name-list that is also on the
         server's name-list.  If there is no such algorithm, both sides
         MUST disconnect.
         Note that "none" must be explicitly listed if it is to be
         acceptable.  The compression algorithm names are listed in
         [Section 6.2](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#section-6.2).
      languages
         This is a name-list of language tags in order of preference
         [[RFC3066](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3066 ""Tags for the Identification of Languages"")].  Both parties MAY ignore this name-list.  If there
         are no language preferences, this name-list SHOULD be empty as
         defined in Section 5 of [[SSH-ARCH](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-ARCH ""The Secure Shell (SSH) Protocol Architecture"")].  Language tags SHOULD NOT
         be present unless they are known to be needed by the sending
         party.
      first_kex_packet_follows
         Indicates whether a guessed key exchange packet follows.  If a
         guessed packet will be sent, this MUST be TRUE.  If no guessed
         packet will be sent, this MUST be FALSE.
         After receiving the SSH_MSG_KEXINIT packet from the other side,
         each party will know whether their guess was right.  If the
         other party's guess was wrong, and this field was TRUE, the
         next packet MUST be silently ignored, and both sides MUST then
         act as determined by the negotiated key exchange method.  If
         the guess was right, key exchange MUST continue using the
         guessed packet.

After the SSH_MSG_KEXINIT message exchange, the key exchange algorithm is run.
It may involve several packet exchanges, as specified by the key exchange method.

Once a party has sent a SSH_MSG_KEXINIT message for key exchange or
   re-exchange, until it has sent a SSH_MSG_NEWKEYS message ([Section](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#section-7.3)
   [7.3](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#section-7.3)), 
it MUST NOT send any messages other than:
   o  Transport layer generic messages (1 to 19) (but SSH_MSG_SERVICE_REQUEST and SSH_MSG_SERVICE_ACCEPT MUST NOT be sent);
   o  Algorithm negotiation messages (20 to 29) (but further SSH_MSG_KEXINIT messages MUST NOT be sent);
   o  Specific key exchange method messages (30 to 49).

The provisions of [Section 11](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#section-11) apply to unrecognized messages.
Note, however, that during a key re-exchange, after sending a SSH_MSG_KEXINIT message, 
each party MUST be prepared to process an arbitrary number of messages that may be in-flight before receiving a SSH_MSG_KEXINIT message from the other party.

#### 密钥交换的输出

The key exchange produces two values: a shared secret K, and an exchange hash H.
Encryption and authentication keys are derived from these.
The exchange hash H from the first key exchange is additionally used as the session identifier, 
which is a unique identifier for this connection.
It is used by authentication methods as a part of the data that is signed as a proof of possession of a private key.  
Once computed, the session identifier is not changed,
even if keys are later re-exchanged.
Each key exchange method specifies a hash function that is used in the key exchange.
The same hash algorithm MUST be used in key derivation.
Here, we'll call it HASH.
Encryption keys MUST be computed as HASH, of a known value and K, as follows:
   o  Initial IV client to server: HASH(K || H || "A" || session_id)
      (Here K is encoded as mpint and "A" as byte and session_id as raw
      data.  "A" means the single character A, ASCII 65).
   o  Initial IV server to client: HASH(K || H || "B" || session_id)
   o  Encryption key client to server: HASH(K || H || "C" || session_id)
   o  Encryption key server to client: HASH(K || H || "D" || session_id)
   o  Integrity key client to server: HASH(K || H || "E" || session_id)
   o  Integrity key server to client: HASH(K || H || "F" || session_id)

Key data MUST be taken from the beginning of the hash output.
As many bytes as needed are taken from the beginning of the hash value.
If the key length needed is longer than the output of the HASH, 
the key is extended by computing HASH of the concatenation of K and H and the entire key so far, 
and appending the resulting bytes (as many as HASH generates) to the key.  
This process is repeated until enough key material is available;
the key is taken from the beginning of this value.

In other words:

      K1 = HASH(K || H || X || session_id)   (X is e.g., "A")
      K2 = HASH(K || H || K1)
      K3 = HASH(K || H || K1 || K2)
      ...
      key = K1 || K2 || K3 || ...

This process will lose entropy if the amount of entropy in K is larger than the internal state size of HASH.

#### 使用秘钥

Key exchange ends by each side sending an SSH_MSG_NEWKEYS message.
This message is sent with the old keys and algorithms.
All messages sent after this message MUST use the new keys and algorithms.
When this message is received, the new keys and algorithms MUST be used for receiving.
The purpose of this message is to ensure that a party is able to respond with an SSH_MSG_DISCONNECT message that the other party can understand if something goes wrong with the key exchange.

      byte      SSH_MSG_NEWKEYS

### Diffie-Hellman 密钥交换

The Diffie-Hellman (DH) key exchange provides a shared secret that cannot be determined by either party alone.  
The key exchange is combined with a signature with the host key to provide host authentication.  
This key exchange method provides explicit server authentication as defined in Section 7.

The following steps are used to exchange a key.
In this, 
C is the client;
S is the server;
p is a large safe prime; 
g is a generator for a subgroup of GF(p); 
q is the order of the subgroup;
 V_S is S's identification string;
 V_C is C's identification string;
 K_S is S's public host key;
 I_C is C's SSH_MSG_KEXINIT message and I_S is S's SSH_MSG_KEXINIT message that have been exchanged before this part begins.

1. C generates a random number x (1 < x < q) and computes
   e = g^x mod p.  C sends e to S.

2. S generates a random number y (0 < y < q) and computes
   f = g^y mod p.  S receives e.  It computes K = e^y mod p,
   H = hash(V_C || V_S || I_C || I_S || K_S || e || f || K)
   (these elements are encoded according to their types; see below),
   and signature s on H with its private host key.  S sends
   (K_S || f || s) to C.  The signing operation may involve a
   second hashing operation.

3. C verifies that K_S really is the host key for S (e.g., using
   certificates or a local database).  C is also allowed to accept
   the key without verification; however, doing so will render the
   protocol insecure against active attacks (but may be desirable for
   practical reasons in the short term in many environments).  C then
   computes K = f^x mod p, H = hash(V_C || V_S || I_C || I_S || K_S
   || e || f || K), and verifies the signature s on H.
   Values of 'e' or 'f' that are not in the range [1, p-1] MUST NOT be
   sent or accepted by either side.  If this condition is violated, the
   key exchange fails.
   This is implemented with the following messages.  The hash algorithm
   for computing the exchange hash is defined by the method name, and is
   called HASH.  The public key algorithm for signing is negotiated with
   the SSH_MSG_KEXINIT messages.
   First, the client sends the following:
   byte      SSH_MSG_KEXDH_INIT
   mpint     e
   The server then responds with the following:
   byte      SSH_MSG_KEXDH_REPLY
   string    server public host key and certificates (K_S)
   mpint     f
   string    signature of H
   The hash H is computed as the HASH hash of the concatenation of the
   following:
      string    V_C, the client's identification string (CR and LF
   
                excluded)
   
      string    V_S, the server's identification string (CR and LF
   
                excluded)
   
      string    I_C, the payload of the client's SSH_MSG_KEXINIT
      string    I_S, the payload of the server's SSH_MSG_KEXINIT
      string    K_S, the host key
      mpint     e, exchange value sent by the client
      mpint     f, exchange value sent by the server
      mpint     K, the shared secret
   This value is called the exchange hash, and it is used to
   authenticate the key exchange.  The exchange hash SHOULD be kept
   secret.
   The signature algorithm MUST be applied over H, not the original
   data.  Most signature algorithms include hashing and additional
   padding (e.g., "ssh-dss" specifies SHA-1 hashing).  In that case, the
   data is first hashed with HASH to compute H, and H is then hashed
   with SHA-1 as part of the signing operation.

#### diffie-hellman-group1-sha1

   The "diffie-hellman-group1-sha1" method specifies the Diffie-Hellman
   key exchange with SHA-1 as HASH, and Oakley Group 2 [[RFC2409](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2409 ""The Internet Key Exchange (IKE)"")] (1024-
   bit MODP Group).  This method MUST be supported for interoperability
   as all of the known implementations currently support it.  Note that
   this method is named using the phrase "group1", even though it
   specifies the use of Oakley Group 2.

#### diffie-hellman-group14-sha1

   The "diffie-hellman-group14-sha1" method specifies a Diffie-Hellman
   key exchange with SHA-1 as HASH and Oakley Group 14 [[RFC3526](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3526 ""More Modular Exponential (MODP) Diffie-Hellman groups for Internet Key Exchange (IKE)"")] (2048-
   bit MODP Group), and it MUST also be supported.

### 密钥交换

   Key re-exchange is started by sending an SSH_MSG_KEXINIT packet when
   not already doing a key exchange (as described in [Section 7.1](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#section-7.1)).  When
   this message is received, a party MUST respond with its own
   SSH_MSG_KEXINIT message, except when the received SSH_MSG_KEXINIT
   already was a reply.  Either party MAY initiate the re-exchange, but
   roles MUST NOT be changed (i.e., the server remains the server, and
   the client remains the client).
   Key re-exchange is performed using whatever encryption was in effect
   when the exchange was started.  Encryption, compression, and MAC
   methods are not changed before a new SSH_MSG_NEWKEYS is sent after
   the key exchange (as in the initial key exchange).  Re-exchange is
   processed identically to the initial key exchange, except for the
   session identifier that will remain unchanged.  It is permissible to
   change some or all of the algorithms during the re-exchange.  Host
   keys can also change.  All keys and initialization vectors are
   recomputed after the exchange.  Compression and encryption contexts
   are reset.
   It is RECOMMENDED that the keys be changed after each gigabyte of
   transmitted data or after each hour of connection time, whichever
   comes sooner.  However, since the re-exchange is a public key
   operation, it requires a fair amount of processing power and should
   not be performed too often.
   More application data may be sent after the SSH_MSG_NEWKEYS packet
   has been sent; key exchange does not affect the protocols that lie
   above the SSH transport layer.

### 服务请求

After the key exchange, the client requests a service.
The service is identified by a name.
The format of names and procedures for defining new names are defined in [SSH-ARCH](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-ARCH) and [SSH-NUMBERS](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-NUMBERS).
Currently, the following names have been reserved:
      ssh-userauth
      ssh-connection

Similar local naming policy is applied to the service names, 
as is applied to the algorithm names.  

A local service should use the PRIVATE USE syntax of "servicename@domain".
      byte      SSH_MSG_SERVICE_REQUEST
      string    service name

If the server rejects the service request, it SHOULD send an appropriate SSH_MSG_DISCONNECT message and MUST disconnect.
When the service starts, it may have access to the session identifier generated during the key exchange.
If the server supports the service (and permits the client to use it), it MUST respond with the following:
      byte      SSH_MSG_SERVICE_ACCEPT
      string    service name

Message numbers used by services should be in the area reserved for them (see [SSH-ARCH](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-ARCH) and [SSH-NUMBERS](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-NUMBERS).
The transport level will continue to process its own messages.
Note that after a key exchange with implicit server authentication,
the client MUST wait for a response to its service request message before sending any further data.

### 附加信息

Either party may send any of the following messages at any time.

#### 断开消息

      byte      SSH_MSG_DISCONNECT
      uint32    reason code
      string    description in ISO-10646 UTF-8 encoding [[RFC3629](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3629 ""UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO 10646"")]
      string    language tag [[RFC3066](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3066 ""Tags for the Identification of Languages"")]

   This message causes immediate termination of the connection.  All
   implementations MUST be able to process this message; they SHOULD be
   able to send this message.
   The sender MUST NOT send or receive any data after this message, and
   the recipient MUST NOT accept any data after receiving this message.
   The Disconnection Message 'description' string gives a more specific
   explanation in a human-readable form.  The Disconnection Message
   'reason code' gives the reason in a more machine-readable format
   (suitable for localization), and can have the values as displayed in
   the table below.  Note that the decimal representation is displayed
   in this table for readability, but the values are actually uint32
   values.

           Symbolic name                                reason code
           -                                --
      SSH_DISCONNECT_HOST_NOT_ALLOWED_TO_CONNECT             1
      SSH_DISCONNECT_PROTOCOL_ERROR                          2
      SSH_DISCONNECT_KEY_EXCHANGE_FAILED                     3
      SSH_DISCONNECT_RESERVED                                4
      SSH_DISCONNECT_MAC_ERROR                               5
      SSH_DISCONNECT_COMPRESSION_ERROR                       6
      SSH_DISCONNECT_SERVICE_NOT_AVAILABLE                   7
      SSH_DISCONNECT_PROTOCOL_VERSION_NOT_SUPPORTED          8
      SSH_DISCONNECT_HOST_KEY_NOT_VERIFIABLE                 9
      SSH_DISCONNECT_CONNECTION_LOST                        10
      SSH_DISCONNECT_BY_APPLICATION                         11
      SSH_DISCONNECT_TOO_MANY_CONNECTIONS                   12
      SSH_DISCONNECT_AUTH_CANCELLED_BY_USER                 13
      SSH_DISCONNECT_NO_MORE_AUTH_METHODS_AVAILABLE         14
      SSH_DISCONNECT_ILLEGAL_USER_NAME                      15

   If the 'description' string is displayed, the control character
   filtering discussed in [[SSH-ARCH](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-ARCH ""The Secure Shell (SSH) Protocol Architecture"")] should be used to avoid attacks by
   sending terminal control characters.
   Requests for assignments of new Disconnection Message 'reason code'
   values (and associated 'description' text) in the range of 0x00000010
   to 0xFDFFFFFF MUST be done through the IETF CONSENSUS method, as
   described in [[RFC2434](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2434)].  The Disconnection Message 'reason code'
   values in the range of 0xFE000000 through 0xFFFFFFFF are reserved for
   PRIVATE USE.  As noted, the actual instructions to the IANA are in
   [[SSH-NUMBERS](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-NUMBERS ""The Secure Shell (SSH) Protocol Assigned Numbers"")].

#### 忽略数据消息

      byte      SSH_MSG_IGNORE
      string    data

   All implementations MUST understand (and ignore) this message at any
   time (after receiving the identification string).  No implementation
   is required to send them.  This message can be used as an additional
   protection measure against advanced traffic analysis techniques.

#### 调试信息

      byte      SSH_MSG_DEBUG
      boolean   always_display
      string    message in ISO-10646 UTF-8 encoding [[RFC3629](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3629 ""UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO 10646"")]
      string    language tag [[RFC3066](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3066 ""Tags for the Identification of Languages"")]

   All implementations MUST understand this message, but they are
   allowed to ignore it.  This message is used to transmit information
   that may help debugging.  If 'always_display' is TRUE, the message
   SHOULD be displayed.  Otherwise, it SHOULD NOT be displayed unless
   debugging information has been explicitly requested by the user.
   The 'message' doesn't need to contain a newline.  It is, however,
   allowed to consist of multiple lines separated by CRLF (Carriage
   Return - Line Feed) pairs.
   If the 'message' string is displayed, the terminal control character
   filtering discussed in [[SSH-ARCH](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-ARCH ""The Secure Shell (SSH) Protocol Architecture"")] should be used to avoid attacks by
   sending terminal control characters.

#### 保留消息

   An implementation MUST respond to all unrecognized messages with an
   SSH_MSG_UNIMPLEMENTED message in the order in which the messages were
   received.  Such messages MUST be otherwise ignored.  Later protocol
   versions may define other meanings for these message types.
      byte      SSH_MSG_UNIMPLEMENTED
      uint32    packet sequence number of rejected message

### 消息号汇总

   The following is a summary of messages and their associated message
   number.
         SSH_MSG_DISCONNECT             1
         SSH_MSG_IGNORE                 2
         SSH_MSG_UNIMPLEMENTED          3
         SSH_MSG_DEBUG                  4
         SSH_MSG_SERVICE_REQUEST        5
         SSH_MSG_SERVICE_ACCEPT         6
         SSH_MSG_KEXINIT                20
         SSH_MSG_NEWKEYS                21
   Note that numbers 30-49 are used for kex packets.  Different kex methods may reuse message numbers in this range.

#### IANA 考虑事项

This document is part of a set. The IANA considerations for the SSH protocol as defined in [SSH-ARCH](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-ARCH), [SSH-USERAUTH](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-USERAUTH), [SSH-CONNECT](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-CONNECT), 
and this document, are detailed in [SSH-NUMBERS](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-NUMBERS).

#### 安全注意事项

This protocol provides a secure encrypted channel over an insecure network.  
It performs server host authentication, key exchange, encryption, and integrity protection.
It also derives a unique session ID that may be used by higher-level protocols.
Full security considerations for this protocol are provided in [SSH-ARCH](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4253#ref-SSH-ARCH).

### 参考资料

#### 规范性参考文献

   [SSH-ARCH]     Ylonen, T. and C. Lonvick, Ed., "The Secure Shell
                  (SSH) Protocol Architecture", [RFC 4251](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4251), January 2006.
   [SSH-USERAUTH] Ylonen, T. and C. Lonvick, Ed., "The Secure Shell
                  (SSH) Authentication Protocol", [RFC 4252](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4252), January
                  2006.
   [SSH-CONNECT]  Ylonen, T. and C. Lonvick, Ed., "The Secure Shell
                  (SSH) Connection Protocol", [RFC 4254](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4254), January 2006.
   [SSH-NUMBERS]  Lehtinen, S. and C. Lonvick, Ed., "The Secure Shell
                  (SSH) Protocol Assigned Numbers", [RFC 4250](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc4250), January
                  2006.
   [RFC1321]      Rivest, R., "The MD5 Message-Digest Algorithm ", [RFC](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1321)
                  [1321](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1321), April 1992.
   [RFC1950]      Deutsch, P. and J-L. Gailly, "ZLIB Compressed Data
                  Format Specification version 3.3", [RFC 1950](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1950), May 1996.
   [RFC1951]      Deutsch, P., "DEFLATE Compressed Data Format
                  Specification version 1.3", [RFC 1951](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1951), May 1996.
   [RFC2104]      Krawczyk, H., Bellare, M., and R. Canetti, "HMAC:
                  Keyed-Hashing for Message Authentication", [RFC 2104](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2104),
                  February 1997.
   [RFC2119]      Bradner, S., "Key words for use in RFCs to Indicate
                  Requirement Levels", [BCP 14](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/bcp14), [RFC 2119](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119), March 1997.
   [RFC2144]      Adams, C., "The CAST-128 Encryption Algorithm", [RFC](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2144)
                  [2144](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2144), May 1997.
   [RFC2409]      Harkins, D. and D. Carrel, "The Internet Key Exchange
                  (IKE)", [RFC 2409](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2409), November 1998.
   [RFC2434]      Narten, T. and H. Alvestrand, "Guidelines for Writing
                  an IANA Considerations Section in RFCs", [BCP 26](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/bcp26), [RFC](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2434)
                  [2434](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2434), October 1998.
   [RFC2440]      Callas, J., Donnerhacke, L., Finney, H., and R.
                  Thayer, "OpenPGP Message Format", [RFC 2440](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2440), November
                  1998.
   [RFC3066]      Alvestrand, H., "Tags for the Identification of
                  Languages", [BCP 47](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/bcp47), [RFC 3066](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3066), January 2001.
   [RFC3447]      Jonsson, J. and B. Kaliski, "Public-Key Cryptography
                  Standards (PKCS) #1: RSA Cryptography Specifications
                  Version 2.1", [RFC 3447](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3447), February 2003.
   [RFC3526]      Kivinen, T. and M. Kojo, "More Modular Exponential
                  (MODP) Diffie-Hellman groups for Internet Key Exchange
                  (IKE)", [RFC 3526](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3526), May 2003.
   [RFC3629]      Yergeau, F., "UTF-8, a transformation format of ISO
                  10646", STD 63, [RFC 3629](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3629), November 2003.
   [FIPS-180-2]   US National Institute of Standards and Technology,
                  "Secure Hash Standard (SHS)", Federal Information
                  Processing Standards Publication 180-2, August 2002.
   [FIPS-186-2]   US National Institute of Standards and Technology,
                  "Digital Signature Standard (DSS)", Federal
                  Information Processing Standards Publication 186-2,
                  January 2000.
   [FIPS-197]     US National Institute of Standards and Technology,
                  "Advanced Encryption Standard (AES)", Federal
                  Information Processing Standards Publication 197,
                  November 2001.
   [FIPS-46-3]    US National Institute of Standards and Technology,
                  "Data Encryption Standard (DES)", Federal Information
                  Processing Standards Publication 46-3, October 1999.
   [SCHNEIER]     Schneier, B., "Applied Cryptography Second Edition:
                  protocols algorithms and source in code in C", John
                  Wiley and Sons, New York, NY, 1996.
   [TWOFISH]      Schneier, B., "The Twofish Encryptions Algorithm: A
                  128-Bit Block Cipher, 1st Edition", March 1999.

#### 参考性文献

   [RFC0894]      Hornig, C., "Standard for the transmission of IP
                  datagrams over Ethernet networks", STD 41, [RFC 894](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc894),
                  April 1984.
   [RFC1661]      Simpson, W., "The Point-to-Point Protocol (PPP)", STD
                  51, [RFC 1661](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc1661), July 1994.

   [RFC2412]      Orman, H., "The OAKLEY Key Determination Protocol",
                  [RFC 2412](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2412), November 1998.
   [ssh-1.2.30]   Ylonen, T., "ssh-1.2.30/RFC", File within compressed
                  tarball [ftp://ftp.funet.fi/pub/unix/security/](ftp://ftp.funet.fi/pub/unix/security/login/ssh/ssh-1.2.30.tar.gz)
                  [login/ssh/ssh-1.2.30.tar.gz](ftp://ftp.funet.fi/pub/unix/security/login/ssh/ssh-1.2.30.tar.gz), November 1995.
