# GIT命令的使用

## 基本设置

### 设置用户名称和邮箱

```bash
# 配置全局
git config --global user.name "username"
git config --global user.email useremail@company.com

#配置当前仓库
git config --local user.name "username"
git config --local user.email useremail@company.com
```

### 保存仓库的账号密码

```bash
# 保存本地仓库的账号
git config --local credential.helper store
# 保存git全局账号
git config --global credential.helper store
```

### 颜色显示设置

#### 默认颜色

```bash
# 开启默认颜色设置
git config --global color.ui true
# 关闭默认颜色设置
git config --global color.ui false
```

#### 具体设置

详细配置见 [Git - git-config Documentation](https://git-scm.com/docs/git-config#_values)

## 基本操作

### Branch操作

#### 查看branch

```bash
# 查看该仓库本地已有的分支
git branch
# 查看该仓库的所有分支
git branch -a
```

#### 切换Branch

```bash
git checkout <name>
```

#### 增加Branch

#### 删除Branch

```bash
# 删除本地分支
git branch -d <name>
# 删除远程分支
git push origin --delete <name>
```

### Tag 操作

#### 查看tag

```bash
git tag -l
```

#### 删除所有tag/release

```bash
# tag 列表
export TAGLIST=`git tag -l`
# 删除本地所有 tag
git tag -d $TAGLIST
# 删除 远端 所有 tag
echo $TAGLIST | xargs git push origin --delete
# 提交
git push origin --tags
```

## 进阶操作

### 删除所有提交记录

提交错误(包含敏感信息)等时候, 就需要清除提交日志

```bash
#切换分支
git checkout --orphan latest_branch

#添加所有文件
git add -A

#提交更改
git commit -am "no message"

#删除分支
git branch -D master

#重命名分支
git branch -m master

#强制更新
git push -f origin master
```



## gitignore 介绍

 `gitignore` 文件用来指定git不需要追踪的文件, 已被追踪的文件不受影响。

Each line in a `gitignore` file specifies a pattern. When deciding whether to ignore a path, Git normally checks `gitignore` patterns from multiple sources, with the following order of precedence, from highest to lowest (within one level of precedence, the last matching pattern decides the outcome):

- Patterns read from the command line for those commands that support them.

- Patterns read from a `.gitignore` file in the same directory as the path, or in any parent directory, with patterns in the higher level files (up to the toplevel of the work tree) being overridden by those in lower level files down to the directory containing the file. These patterns match relative to the location of the `.gitignore` file. A project normally includes such `.gitignore` files in its repository, containing patterns for files generated as part of the project build.

- Patterns read from `$GIT_DIR/info/exclude`.

- Patterns read from the file specified by the configuration variable `core.excludesFile`.

Which file to place a pattern in depends on how the pattern is meant to be used.

- Patterns which should be version-controlled and distributed to other repositories via clone (i.e., files that all developers will want to ignore) should go into a `.gitignore` file.

- Patterns which are specific to a particular repository but which do not need to be shared with other related repositories (e.g., auxiliary files that live inside the repository but are specific to one user’s workflow) should go into the `$GIT_DIR/info/exclude` file.

- Patterns which a user wants Git to ignore in all situations (e.g., backup or temporary files generated by the user’s editor of choice) generally go into a file specified by `core.excludesFile` in the user’s `~/.gitconfig`. Its default value is $XDG_CONFIG_HOME/git/ignore. If $XDG_CONFIG_HOME is either not set or empty, $HOME/.config/git/ignore is used instead.

The underlying Git plumbing tools, such as *git ls-files* and *git read-tree*, read `gitignore` patterns specified by command-line options, or from files specified by command-line options. Higher-level Git tools, such as *git status* and *git add*, use patterns from the sources specified above.

### 规则

- 空行不匹配任何文件，用来作为分割符提高可读性。

- 以`#`  号开头的行为注释行。Put a backslash ("`\`") in front of the first hash for patterns that begin with a hash.

- 忽略尾部的空格，除非这一行后面有 backslash ("`\`").

- An optional prefix "`!`" which negates the pattern; any matching file excluded by a previous pattern will become included again. It is not possible to re-include a file if a parent directory of that file is excluded. Git doesn’t list excluded directories for performance reasons, so any patterns on contained files have no effect, no matter where they are defined. Put a backslash ("`\`") in front of the first "`!`" for patterns that begin with a literal "`!`", for example, "`\!important!.txt`".

- The slash */* is used as the directory separator. Separators may occur at the beginning, middle or end of the `.gitignore` search pattern.

- If there is a separator at the beginning or middle (or both) of the pattern, then the pattern is relative to the directory level of the particular `.gitignore` file itself. Otherwise the pattern may also match at any level below the `.gitignore` level.

- If there is a separator at the end of the pattern then the pattern will only match directories, otherwise the pattern can match both files and directories.

- For example, a pattern `doc/frotz/` matches `doc/frotz` directory, but not `a/doc/frotz` directory; however `frotz/` matches `frotz` and `a/frotz` that is a directory (all paths are relative from the `.gitignore` file).

- An asterisk "`*`" matches anything except a slash. The character "`?`" matches any one character except "`/`". The range notation, e.g. `[a-zA-Z]`, can be used to match one of the characters in a range. See fnmatch(3) and the FNM_PATHNAME flag for a more detailed description.

Two consecutive asterisks ("`**`") in patterns matched against full pathname may have special meaning:

- A leading "`**`" followed by a slash means match in all directories. For example, "`**/foo`" matches file or directory "`foo`" anywhere, the same as pattern "`foo`". "`**/foo/bar`" matches file or directory "`bar`" anywhere that is directly under directory "`foo`".

- A trailing "`/**`" matches everything inside. For example, "`abc/**`" matches all files inside directory "`abc`", relative to the location of the `.gitignore` file, with infinite depth.

- A slash followed by two consecutive asterisks then a slash matches zero or more directories. For example, "`a/**/b`" matches "`a/b`", "`a/x/b`", "`a/x/y/b`" and so on.

- Other consecutive asterisks are considered regular asterisks and will match according to the previous rules.

### [CONFIGURATION](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitignore#_configuration)

The optional configuration variable `core.excludesFile` indicates a path to a file containing patterns of file names to exclude, similar to `$GIT_DIR/info/exclude`. Patterns in the exclude file are used in addition to those in `$GIT_DIR/info/exclude`.

### [NOTES](https://git-scm.com/docs/gitignore#_notes)

The purpose of gitignore files is to ensure that certain files not tracked by Git remain untracked.

使用 `git rm --cached  FILE` 来停止追踪正在追踪的文件。

## 例子

- The pattern `hello.*` matches any file or folder whose name begins with `hello`. If one wants to restrict this only to the directory and not in its subdirectories, one can prepend the pattern with a slash, i.e. `/hello.*`; the pattern now matches `hello.txt`, `hello.c` but not `a/hello.java`.

- The pattern `foo/` will match a directory `foo` and paths underneath it, but will not match a regular file or a symbolic link `foo` (this is consistent with the way how pathspec works in general in Git)

- The pattern `doc/frotz` and `/doc/frotz` have the same effect in any `.gitignore` file. In other words, a leading slash is not relevant if there is already a middle slash in the pattern.

- The pattern "foo/*", matches "foo/test.json" (a regular file), "foo/bar" (a directory), but it does not match "foo/bar/hello.c" (a regular file), as the asterisk in the pattern does not match "bar/hello.c" which has a slash in it.

```bash
$ git status
[...]
# Untracked files:
[...]
#       Documentation/foo.html
#       Documentation/gitignore.html
#       file.o
#       lib.a
#       src/internal.o
[...]
$ cat .git/info/exclude
# ignore objects and archives, anywhere in the tree.
*.[oa]
$ cat Documentation/.gitignore
# ignore generated html files,
*.html
# except foo.html which is maintained by hand
!foo.html
$ git status
[...]
# Untracked files:
[...]
#       Documentation/foo.html
[...]
```

Another example:

```bash
$ cat .gitignore
vmlinux*
$ ls arch/foo/kernel/vm*
arch/foo/kernel/vmlinux.lds.S
$ echo '!/vmlinux*' >arch/foo/kernel/.gitignore
```

The second .gitignore prevents Git from ignoring `arch/foo/kernel/vmlinux.lds.S`.

Example to exclude everything except a specific directory `foo/bar` (note the `/*` - without the slash, the wildcard would also exclude everything within `foo/bar`):

```bash
$ cat .gitignore
# exclude everything except directory foo/bar
/*
!/foo
/foo/*
!/foo/bar
```
